+++
title = "Book review: Humble Pi by Matt Parker"
description = "A praise of human ability to make mistakes"
tags = [
  "book-review",
]
date = "2024-05-09"
+++

I quite liked to book, it has a lot of interesting facts that I didn’t know
about, but it also had a lot of facts I already did know about especially
computing related. I’m not feeling particularly smug about that because those
that I did know I learned mostly from YouTube videos and some of those were by
Matt Parker anyway.

As Matt argues in the later parts of the book, humans are really good finding
ways around the safeguards that were put in place precisely to protect from the
kinds of mistakes we are about to do by avoiding them. I myself have done this
numerous of times, so thank the universe I’m not working on the kind of software
systems that concern people lives, because I’m certain there would be bodies
left behind by my short-sightedness. It is interesting though, that I do put a
lot of thought into setting systems in place to protect against human errors
usually, it’s just that I promptly go around those systems when it becomes a
slight inconvenience.

It’s intriguing to think about much more costly the mathematical and engineering
mistakes will become in the future, as we continue to further and further depend
on modern technological solutions for the modern technological world. Matt
points out multiple instances when mistakes cost lives due to, among others,
faulty medical equipment, poorly designed buildings or load baring
miscalculations, and we seem to be in a rush to help expand that list. Thinking
of everything Boeing related or so many car manufacturers issues recalls like
Tesla, GM, Toyota, Nissan and more.
