+++
title = "Maximal effort, minimal impact: How I learned what engineering guidelines should be like"
description = "A story of how I fixed our engineering guidelines"
tags = [
  "productivity",
  "leadership"
]
date = "2024-10-13"
+++

At a point in my past I’ve found myself working in a somewhat successful
startup, it seemed successful because we were hiring more and more engineers and
the scope of work and number of teams kept steadily increasing. Somewhere in the
middle I realised our engineering staff needed a set of engineering principles
and a progression framework that would act as a north star for my fellow team
members to follow describing how to navigate the chaotic theatre of war that is
a start up tech company.

I’ve set down a goal to myself to inscribe a complete guide for our team to not
only excel in their roles but also advance themselves and improve. It felt like
a monumental task but one that would pay off greatly for the team, and the
company. I took this project on with great enthusiasm. I poured my knowledge
into the document, covering every nook and cranny I could think of. Whether it
was how to handle edge cases, best practices for problem solving and
collaboration. I wanted these documents one to rule them all, to be a one-stop
resource for developers so that no matter what situation they found themselves
in, they could turn to these guides and find the answers they needed.

Few weeks later, I had produced a comprehensive, thorough… and entirely
unreadable wall of text that even I thought it was to difficult to follow and
that should have been a red flag. It was the kind of thing you’d look at, drop a
like on the Confluence page and then never open again. I should have taken a
hint from the fact that Moses used a couple of stone tablets and a chisel to
write down rules for our entire society and I should have scraped it then and
there but I didn’t, the effort I put into it made me blind to the fact that
reading these documents was more of an endurance test than a helpful guide. The
problem was that I had mistaken detail for effectiveness.

After a year of these documents being more or less ignored by the team the
realization set it and led me to rethink my approach. Less is indeed more.
Imagine what kind of team you need and want and reduce it to the most basic of
principles that even a twelve year old child can follow. Anything more then that
is futile.

So I took a stab at it again, spending the time I did before writing to instead
think about what those basics are instead. Rather than trying to dictate every
step or outcome, I shifted my focus to core principles that would encourage the
right behaviours and attitudes. I want my team to learn together, to be good
team mates, to share the burden, provide feedback to one another, to own their
work from start to finish, to automate and to, most importantly, be business
aware.

The big takeaway here? Less is often more. In my quest to be comprehensive, I
had forgotten that people are much more likely to follow a set of adaptable
guidelines than an encyclopedia, the rules must be simple and adaptable so that
people can actually make decisions in real time regardless of the situation they
face. Your mission is to steer not to control.
