+++
title = "Yet another project I will never complete"
description = "The lessons learned from yet another started-but-not-finished project"
tags = [
  "self-improvement",
  "productivity"
]
date = "2024-06-18"
+++

Few weeks ago I had an idea for an app, so naturally I started searching for a
similar one on Google and I didn’t find anything, I even spoke with some of my
friends about it and they didn’t mention anything that they were aware of
anything similar, so I got excited and started planning my efforts in developing
it, I even took a week of vacation from work to focus on that. The idea was a
time tracking app for developers, it would work by users installing a plugin
into their IDE and then the plugin would periodically upload the metrics to a
backend which would provide the users with dashboard and analytics. Some of you
might know that such a thing already exists and it’s
called [Wakatime](https://wakatime.com/dashboard), I didn’t
know that, and now that I’ve learned about it I’ve decided to scrap my project,
as this one does pretty much the same things as I had in mind, and the traction
behind it is pretty decent which would make it difficult for me to compete.

But this is just another rock on a mountain of projects that I’ve thrown into
the bin, it’s quite an interesting situation that many developers have found
themselves in, maybe we all just have ADHD and only some of us manage to fight
it, although I understand the feeling of excitement when you run `git init` and
it’s wonderful. Either way, after an initial disheartening and disappointing
feeling, I’m actually quite happy about the things I’ve learned in my few weeks
of half (or more like quarter) working on this project.

Firstly and most obviously, I didn’t spend enough time searching for already
existing solutions. In hindsight, Wakatime was an obvious find, it’s not like
they didn’t do their SEO, but I just should have invested more of my time in
investigating rather then quickly jumping into development, especially
considering how much time I was planning to devote to that project. I did have
an inkling more investigation was needed, but maybe I didn’t want to find
anything because I was so happy with my idea and thought it would be a great
thing to work on. Next time, thought, more exploration before committing.

Secondly, I’ve made it much more difficult then it should have been by using
stack that I wasn’t familiar with, my plan with the project was also to get back
to Golang a bit and to learn SvelteKit for the frontend, even though I also had
to learn IntelliJ plugin framework as well, and with all that I still planned my
time as if I was using a very familiar stack where I can find solutions quickly.
This was a big problem, because it was difficult to keep myself motivated when
there were so many unknowns in the development process.

Thirdly, I’ve learned a bit more about myself and what motivates me and how to
hack around that to achieve my goals more easily. Giving myself small tasks that
contribute to a big goal which I was tracking in a Notion board was a very
useful thing which kept me focused when I needed it. I’ve also invested time
into planning out my day in the morning, this is a more general advice, but it
worked great on this project as well.

There we go, even though the pile of dead projects has grown by one more, I’m
feeling good about the things I’ve learned so I’m still happy about it all in
general. Next project might fare a bit better.
